Still Another Day: I
 
 Today is that day, the day that carried
a desperate light that since has died.
Don't let the squatters know:
let’s keep it all between us,
day, between your bell
and my secret.

Today is dead winter in the forgotten land
that comes to visit me, with a cross on the map
and a volcano in the snow, to return to me,
to return again the water
fallen on the roof of my childhood.
Today when the sun began with its shafts
to tell the story, so clear, so old,
the slanting rain fell like a sword,
the rain my hard heart welcomes.

You, my love, still asleep in August,
my queen, my woman, my vastness, my geography
kiss of mud, the carbon-coated zither,
you, vestment of my persistent song,
today you are reborn again and with the sky’s
black water confuse me and compel me:
I must renew my bones in your kingdom,
I must still uncloud my earthly duties.

---
Still Another Day: XVII/Men
 
 The truth is in the prologue.  Death to the romantic fool,
to the expert in solitary confinement,
I’m the same as the teacher from Colombia,
the rotarian from Philadelphia, the merchant
from Paysandu who save his silver
to come here.  We all arrive by different streets,
by unequal languages, at Silence.

---
Curse
 
 Furrowed motherland, I swear that in your ashesyou will be born like a flower of eternal waterI swear that from your mouth of thirst will come to the airthe petals of bread, the spiltinaugurated flower. Cursed,cursed, cursed be those who with an ax and serpentcame to your earthly arena, cursed thosewho waited for this day to open the doorof the dwelling to the moor and the bandit:What have you achieved? Bring, bring the lamp,see the soaked earth, see the blackened little boneeaten by the flames, the garmentof murdered Spain. 
---
[Body of a woman, white hills, white thighs]
 
 Body of a woman, white hills, white thighs,when you surrender, you stretch out like the world.My body, savage and peasant, undermines youand makes a son leap in the bottom of the earth.I was lonely as a tunnel. Birds flew from me.And night invaded me with her powerful army.To survive I forged you like a weapon,like an arrow for my bow, or a stone for my sling.But now the hour of revenge falls, and I love you.Body of skin, of moss, of firm and thirsty milk!And the cups of your breasts! And your eyes full of absence!And the roses of your mound! And your voice slow and sad!Body of my woman, I will live on through your marvelousness.My thirst, my desire without end, my wavering road!Dark river beds down which the eternal thirst is flowing,and the fatigue is flowing, and the grief without shore. 
---
The Book of Questions, III
 
 III.


Tell me, is the rose naked
or is that her only dress?

Why do trees conceal
the splendor of their roots?

Who hears the regrets
of the thieving automobile?

Is there anything in the world sadder 
than a train standing in the rain?


---
Unity
 
 There is something dense, united, settled in the depths,
repeating its number, its identical sign.
How it is noted that stones have touched time,
in their refined matter there is an odor of age,
of water brought by the sea, from salt and sleep.
 
I'm encircled by a single thing, a single movement: 
a mineral weight, a honeyed light
cling to the sound of the word "noche":
the tint of wheat, of ivory, of tears,
things of leather, of wood, of wool,
archaic, faded, uniform,
collect around me like walls.

I work quietly, wheeling over myself,
a crow over death, a crow in mourning.
I mediate, isolated in the spread of seasons,
centric, encircled by a silent geometry:
a partial temperature drifts down from the sky,
a distant empire of confused unities
reunites encircling me.

---
Ode to My Socks
 
Maru Mori brought mea pairof sockswhich she knitted herselfwith her sheepherder’s hands,two socks as softas rabbits.I slipped my feetinto themas though intotwocasesknittedwith threads oftwilightand goatskin.Violent socks,my feet weretwo fish madeof wool,two long sharkssea-blue, shotthroughby one golden thread,two immense blackbirds,two cannons:my feetwere honoredin this waybytheseheavenlysocks.They wereso handsomefor the first timemy feet seemed to meunacceptablelike two decrepitfiremen, firemenunworthyof that wovenfire,of those glowingsocks.
NeverthelessI resistedthe sharp temptationto save them somewhereas schoolboyskeepfireflies,as learned mencollectsacred texts,I resistedthe mad impulseto put theminto a goldencageand each day give thembirdseedand pieces of pink melon.Like explorersin the jungle who handover the very raregreen deerto the spitand eat itwith remorse,I stretched outmy feetand pulled onthe magnificentsocksand then my shoes.
The moralof my ode is this:beauty is twicebeautyand what is good is doublygoodwhen it is a matter of two socksmade of woolin winter.

---
Walking Around
 
It so happens I am sick of being a man.And it happens that I walk into tailorshops and movie housesdried up, waterproof, like a swan made of feltsteering my way in a water of wombs and ashes.
The smell of barbershops makes me break into hoarse sobs.The only thing I want is to lie still like stones or wool.The only thing I want is to see no more stores, no gardens,no more goods, no spectacles, no elevators.
It so happens I am sick of my feet and my nailsand my hair and my shadow.It so happens I am sick of being a man.
Still it would be marvelousto terrify a law clerk with a cut lily,or kill a nun with a blow on the ear.It would be greatto go through the streets with a green knifeletting out yells until I died of the cold.
I don’t want to go on being a root in the dark,insecure, stretched out, shivering with sleep,going on down, into the moist guts of the earth,taking in and thinking, eating every day.
I don’t want so much misery.I don’t want to go on as a root and a tomb,alone under the ground, a warehouse with corpses,half frozen, dying of grief.
That’s why Monday, when it sees me comingwith my convict face, blazes up like gasoline,and it howls on its way like a wounded wheel,and leaves tracks full of warm blood leading toward the night.
And it pushes me into certain corners, into some moist houses,into hospitals where the bones fly out the window,into shoeshops that smell like vinegar,and certain streets hideous as cracks in the skin.
There are sulphur-colored birds, and hideous intestineshanging over the doors of houses that I hate,and there are false teeth forgotten in a coffeepot,there are mirrorsthat ought to have wept from shame and terror,there are umbrellas everywhere, and venoms, and umbilical cords.
I stroll along serenely, with my eyes, my shoes,my rage, forgetting everything,I walk by, going through office buildings and orthopedic shops,and courtyards with washing hanging from the line:underwear, towels and shirts from which slow
dirty tears are falling.

---
The Song of Despair
 
The memory of you emerges from the night around me.The river mingles its stubborn lament with the sea.
Deserted like the wharves at dawn.It is the hour of departure, oh deserted one!
Cold flower heads are raining over my heart.Oh pit of debris, fierce cave of the shipwrecked.
In you the wars and the flights accumulated.From you the wings of the song birds rose.
You swallowed everything, like distance.Like the sea, like time. In you everything sank!
It was the happy hour of assault and the kiss.The hour of the spell that blazed like a lighthouse.
Pilot’s dread, fury of a blind diver,turbulent drunkenness of love, in you everything sank!
In the childhood of mist my soul, winged and wounded.Lost discoverer, in you everything sank!
You girdled sorrow, you clung to desire,sadness stunned you, in you everything sank!
I made the wall of shadow draw back,beyond desire and act, I walked on.
Oh flesh, my own flesh, woman whom I loved and lost,I summon you in the moist hour, I raise my song to you.
Like a jar you housed the infinite tenderness,and the infinite oblivion shattered you like a jar.
There was the black solitude of the islands,and there, woman of love, your arms took me in.
There were thirst and hunger, and you were the fruit.There were grief and the ruins, and you were the miracle.
Ah woman, I do not know how you could contain mein the earth of yoursoul, in the cross of your arms!
How terrible and brief was my desire of you!How difficult and drunken, how tensed and avid.
Cemetery of kisses, there is still fire in your tombs,still the fruited boughs burn, pecked at by birds.
Oh the bitten mouth, oh the kissed limbs,oh the hungering teeth, oh the entwined bodies.
Oh the mad coupling of hope and forcein which we merged and despaired.
And the tenderness, light as water and as flour.And the word scarcely begun on the lips.
This was my destiny and in it was the voyage of my longing,and in it my longing fell, in you everything sank!
Oh pit of debris, everything fell into you,what sorrow did you not express, in what sorrow are you not drowned!
From billow to billow you still called and sang.Standing like a sailor in the prow of a vessel.
You still flowered in songs, you still broke in currents.Oh pit of debris, open and bitter well.
Pale blind diver, luckless slinger,lost discoverer, in you everything sank!
It is the hour of departure, the hard cold hourwhich the night fastens to all the timetables.
The rustling belt of the sea girdles the shore.Cold stars heave up, black birds migrate.
Deserted like th wharves at dawn.Only the tremulous shadow twists in my hands.
Oh farther than everything. Oh farther than everything.
It is the hour of departure. Oh abandoned one.

---
Nothing But Death
 
There are cemeteries that are lonely,graves full of bones that do not make a sound,the heart moving through a tunnel,in it darkness, darkness, darkness,like a shipwreck we die going into ourselves,as though we were drowning inside our hearts,as though we lived falling out of the skin into the soul.
And there are corpses,feet made of cold and sticky clay,death is inside the bones,like a barking where there are no dogs,coming out from bells somewhere, from graves somewhere,growing in the damp air like tears of rain. 
Sometimes I see alonecoffins under sail, embarking with the pale dead, with women that have dead hair,with bakers who are as white as angels,and pensive young girls married to notary publics,caskets sailing up the vertical river of the dead,the river of dark purple,moving upstream with sails filled out by the sound of death,filled by the sound of death which is silence.
Death arrives among all that soundlike a shoe with no foot in it, like a suit with no man in it,comes and knocks, using a ring with no stone in it, with nofinger in it,comes and shouts with no mouth, with no tongue, with nothroat.Nevertheless its steps can be heardand its clothing makes a hushed sound, like a tree.
I'm not sure, I understand only a little, I can hardly see,but it seems to me that its singing has the color of damp violets,of violets that are at home in the earth,because the face of death is green,and the look death gives is green,with the penetrating dampness of a violet leafand the somber color of embittered winter.
But death also goes through the world dressed as a broom,lapping the floor, looking for dead bodies,death is inside the broom,the broom is the tongue of death looking for corpses,it is the needle of death looking for thread.
Death is inside the folding cots:it spends its life sleeping on the slow mattresses,in the black blankets, and suddenly breathes out:it blows out a mournful sound that swells the sheets,and the beds go sailing toward a portwhere death is waiting, dressed like an admiral.

---
Love for This Book
 
In these lonely regions I have been powerfulin the same way as a cheerful toolor like untrammeled grass which lets loose its seedor like a dog rolling around in the dew.Matilde, time will pass wearing out and burninganother skin, other fingernails, other eyes, and thenthe algae that lashed our wild rocks,the waves that unceasingly construct their own whiteness,all will be firm without us,all will be ready for the new days,which will not know our destiny.
What do we leave here but the lost cryof the seabird, in the sand of winter, in the gusts of windthat cut our faces and kept userect in the light of purity,as in the heart of an illustrious star?
What do we leave, living like a nestof surly birds, alive, among the thicketsor static, perched on the frigid cliffs?So then, if living was nothing more than anticipatingthe earth, this soil and its harshness,deliver me, my love, from not doing my duty, and help mereturn to my place beneath the hungry earth.
We asked the ocean for its rose,its open star, its bitter contact,and to the overburdened, to the fellow human being, to the woundedwe gave the freedom gathered in the wind.It's late now. Perhapsit was only a long day the color of honey and blue,perhaps only a night, like the eyelidof a grave look that encompassedthe measure of the sea that surrounded us,and in this territory we found only a kiss,only ungraspable love that will remain herewandering among the sea foam and roots.

---
